docs: Refactor-i18n-DOCS-758 (#36924)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/i18n.md

# Adding languages and locales

{@a angular-i18n}

This topic describes how to add languages and locale information to your app.

Adding a language may not be enough to provide a proper user experience.
You may need to add the *locale* information, which is a set of user preferences for a region (such as a country) that includes a *specific version* of the language.
The locale determines the formatting and parsing of dates, times, numbers, and currencies as well as measurement units and the translated names for time zones, languages, and countries.

Many locales, such as France and Canada, use the same language (French) but differ in grammar, punctuation, and formats for currency, decimal numbers, and dates.

> You can add specific language-locale combinations, such as French for France and French for Canada.

Reviewer: I feel like it would be helpful to show the locale ids in this paragraph, e.g. `fr`, `fr-CA`, etc.

Author: OK, and I will edit a brief sentence explaining what IDs are (this is explained more later in the topic). 

I'm glad you are reviewing this! I was going to contact you anyway. I have 2 requests:

1. The stackblitz.json: I'm trying to create a stackblitz live version of the example to link to. As I understand it, as part of the AIO build process, the StackblitzBuilder tool scans the AIO documentation folders, looking for stackblitz.json files, and generates corresponding Stackblitz HTML definition files. Should I separate stackblitz.json into a separate PR and push that through first? My link won't work until this happens.

2. I need a tech review of the section I just edited, from the beginning up to (but not including) the "Template translations" sections. I refer to the `localize` option and took out the `-i18nLocale` (or option i18nLocale) with ng build, because it is marked as deprecated in the API. I need to know if (a) what I wrote is accurate and (2) complete. Many thanks!

# Localizing your app

{@a angular-i18n}

*Internationalization* (i18n) is the process of designing and preparing your app to be usable in different locales around the world.
*Localization* is the process of building versions of your app for different locales, including extracting text for translation into different languages, and formatting data for particular locales.

> A *locale* identifies a region (such as a country) in which people speak a particular language or language varient. The locale determines the formatting and parsing of dates, times, numbers, and currencies as well as measurement units and the translated names for time zones, languages, and countries.

Author: Done, thanks!

{@a i18n-pipes}

## Format data based on locale

Angular provides the following built-in data transformation [pipes](guide/glossary#pipe "Definition of a pipe") that use the `LOCALE_ID` token to format data according to the locale's rules:

* [`DatePipe`](api/common/DatePipe): Formats a date value.
* [`CurrencyPipe`](api/common/CurrencyPipe): Transforms a number to a currency string.
* [`DecimalPipe`](/api/common/DecimalPipe): Transforms a number into a decimal number string.
* [`PercentPipe`](api/common/PercentPipe): Transforms a number to a percentage string.

For example, `{{today | date}}` uses `DatePipe` to display the current date in the format for the locale in `LOCALE_ID`.

You can add the `locale` parameter to override the value of `LOCALE_ID`. For example, to force the currency to use `en-US` no matter which language-locale you set for `LOCALE_ID`, use this form: `{{today | currency : 'en-US'}}`.

{@a Template-translations}

## Prepare templates for translations

> To translate the text in your app's templates, extract all template text marked with the Angular `i18n` attribute into an industry-standard *translation source file*, which you can then copy and send to a translation service or translator.

Author: OK, chose the first one:

> To translate the text in your app's templates, mark sections of text with the Angular `i18n` attribute, then extract all of the marked text into an industry-standard *translation source file*, which you can then copy and send to a translation service or translator.

> To translate the text in your app's templates, extract all template text marked with the Angular `i18n` attribute into an industry-standard *translation source file*, which you can then copy and send to a translation service or translator.

Author: Note to reviewers: I make all the changes in an edit pass, and then manually push them in a single commit. I don't use the automatic "Commit suggestion" or batch because I messed up doing that (once).

> To translate the text in your app's templates, extract all template text marked with the Angular `i18n` attribute into an industry-standard *translation source file*, which you can then copy and send to a translation service or translator.

Author: This has now changed to the following:

> To translate your app's templates, you need to prepare the text for a translator or translation service by marking text, attributes, and other elements with the Angular `i18n` attribute.
> Follow these general steps:
> 

No need to go through the entire "source" and "translation" files process at this point. All that comes later.

The service or translator edits the copy and sends back a *translation file*, which is a version of the source file with text translated into a specific language.
From one source file translators produce multiple transaction files—one for each language.

To prepare your templates for this extraction, follow these general steps:

1. [Mark text for translations](#i18n-attribute).

> The translator will translate all marked text marked with the Angular `i18n` attribute.

Author: OK thanks, done.

2. [Add helpful descriptions and meanings](#help-translator) to help the translator with additional information or context.

> 3. [Manage marked text with custom IDs](#custom-id) so that updating the text is easier.

Author: First, thanks for taking the time to explain this. I was in fact lost in the details and didn't realize these points. We should emphasize the use of meanings and descriptions, but put custom IDs in an "advanced" section for those who need to know.

Thus, I took your advice and put together a section at the end, which is as follows:

> ## Optional practices
> 
> The following are optional practices that may be required in special cases:
> 
> * [Set the source locale manually](#set-source-manually) if you need to set the [LOCALE_ID](https://angular.io/api/core/LOCALE_ID "API reference for LOCALE_ID") token.
> * [Import a custom locale](#import-locale) to add a custom language-locale combination.
> * [Manage marked text with custom IDs](#custom-id) if you require more control over matching translations.
>  

Then I added a key point to the "Manage marked text with custom IDs" section (now at the end of the doc):

> Some translation systems require a specific form or syntax for the ID.
> To address this requirement, you can mark text with _custom_ IDs.
> While most developers don't need to use custom IDs, some may want to use IDs that have a unique syntax to convey additional metadata (such as the library, component, or area of the app in which the text appears). 

I also edited the text to describe the benefit:

> The benefit of using custom IDs is that the custom ID is persistent.
> If you change the text, the extractor tool does not change the ID, so you don't have to take the extra step of updating the translation.
> Otherwise, when you change the translatable text, the extractor tool generates a new ID for that translation unit, and you must then update each of the translated files with the new ID.

And to address the other comment you made about the drawback:

> The drawback of using custom IDs is that if you change the text, chances are the translation needs to also change. With a custom ID your translation may be out-of-sync with the newly changed source text.

Thanks!

<div class="alert is-helpful">

`i18n` is a custom attribute, recognized by Angular tools and compilers.
After translation, the compiler removes it. It is not an Angular directive.

</div>

{@a help-translator}

### Add helpful descriptions and meanings

To translate a text message accurately, the translator may need additional information or context.

You can add a _description_ of the text message as the value of the `i18n` attribute, as shown in the following example:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/app.component.html" region="i18n-attribute-desc" header="src/app/app.component.html"></code-example>

The translator may also need to know the meaning or intent of the text message within this particular app context, in order to translate it the same way as other text with the same meaning.
Start the `i18n` attribute value with the _meaning_ and
separate it from the _description_ with the `|` character: `<meaning>|<description>`.
For example, you can add the fact that this `<h1>` tag is a site header:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/app.component.html" region="i18n-attribute-meaning" header="src/app/app.component.html"></code-example>

> For example, any text marked with `site header` (as shown in the previous example) will be translated the same way as any others marked with `site header`.

Author: Rather than changing the example, I added a reason why you would want the `<h1>` to be translated the exact same way whether used as a heading or used in a reference in another section of text (such as in a table of contents). I then used the 'Right' example in the helper box below.

> For example, any text marked with `site header` (as shown in the previous example) will be translated the same way as any others marked with `site header`.

Author: @petebacondarwin : An issue surfaced ([35334](https://github.com/angular/angular/issues/35334)) requesting that we update the example. I will need help doing this. If we can change the example we can also add the above suggested change. Please let me know how to change the example to be up-to-date (i.e., using an `i18n` section in angular.json, and changing the deprecated `--i18nLocale`. Thanks.

> For example, any text marked with `site header` (as shown in the previous example) will be translated the same way as any others marked with `site header`.

Reviewer: I sent you some messages on Slack @rockument69

> If the same text has different _meanings_, they will be translated differently.

Author: OK on both, thanks! I created a helpful callout titled "How meanings control text extraction and merging".

The Angular extraction tool (described in [Work with translation source files](#ng-xi18n) in this topic) preserves the _meaning_ and _description_ in the translation
source file.
Angular uses the _meaning_ and the text to generate a specific translation ID.
If you have similar text elements with different _meanings_, they are extracted with separate IDs.
If you have similar text elements with different _descriptions_ but the same _meaning_, they are extracted only once, with the same ID.

{@a custom-id}

### Manage marked text with custom IDs

The Angular extraction tool generates a file with a translation unit entry for each `i18n`
attribute in a template.
As described in the previous section, it assigns each translation unit a unique ID such as the following:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" header="messages.fr.xlf.html" region="generated-id"></code-example>

When you change the translatable text, the extractor tool generates a new ID for that translation unit.

> You must then update the translation file with the new ID.

Author: OK, this one is done.

> To simplify text changes, you can specify a _custom ID_ in the `i18n` attribute by using the prefix `@@`.

Author: I added:

> The drawback of using custom IDs is that if you change the text, chances are the translation needs to also change. With a custom ID your translation may be out-of-sync with the newly changed source text.

> To simplify text changes, you can specify a _custom ID_ in the `i18n` attribute by using the prefix `@@`.

Author: OK, I rewrote the section, so the above paragraph has changed. Here's the new rewrite:

> When you change the translatable text, the extractor generates a new ID for that translation unit.
> In most cases a text change would also require a change to the translation.
> Therefore, using a new ID keeps the text change in sync with translations.
> 
> However, some translation systems require a specific form or syntax for the ID.
> To address this requirement, you can mark text with _custom_ IDs.
> While most developers don't need to use custom IDs, some may want to use IDs that have a unique syntax to convey additional metadata (such as the library, component, or area of the app in which the text appears). 
> ...
> If you change the text, the extractor does *not* change the ID.
> As a result, you don't have to take the extra step of updating the translation.
> The drawback of using custom IDs is that if you change the text, your translation may be out-of-sync with the newly changed source text.
>

The following example defines the custom ID `introductionHeader`:

<code-example path='i18n/doc-files/app.component.html' region='i18n-attribute-solo-id' header='app/app.component.html'></code-example>

When you specify a custom ID, the extractor tool and compiler generate a translation unit with that custom ID as follows:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" header="messages.fr.xlf.html" region="custom-id"></code-example>

The custom ID is persistent.
If you change the text, the extractor tool does not change the ID, so you don't have to take the extra step of updating the translation.

> #### Use a custom ID with a description

Author: OK done.

> # Adding languages and locales

Author: Adding the search term, and changing the title to "Localizing your app" to avoid confusion.

> # Adding languages and locales

Reviewer: Woh! You found a bug in the doc-gen! I'll fix that now.

> # Adding languages and locales

Reviewer: Here is the fix - https://github.com/angular/angular/pull/37132
You should be able to add the `{@searchKeywords}` inline tag again after this has merged.

> # Adding languages and locales

Author: OK added, it now works! Thanks.

{@a angular-i18n}

This topic describes how to add languages and locale information to your app.

> Adding a language may not be enough to provide a proper user experience.

Author: I completely rewrote the opening section after looking over your comments. I went back to the ICU site to get the proper definition of "locale". See new version.

> You may need to add the *locale* information, which is a set of user preferences for a region (such as a country) that includes a *specific version* of the language.

Author: I completely rewrote the opening section with the proper definition of "locale". See new version.

The locale determines the formatting and parsing of dates, times, numbers, and currencies as well as measurement units and the translated names for time zones, languages, and countries.

Many locales, such as France and Canada, use the same language (French, identified as `fr`) but differ in grammar, punctuation, and formats for currency, decimal numbers, and dates.

> You can add specific language-locale combinations, such as French for France (`fr-FR`) and French for Canada (`fr-CA`). (These identifiers are explained in [Set your app's source local](#setting-up-the-locale-of-your-app) in this topic.)

Author: Going with "guide" as you suggest. Thanks.

* [Templates](guide/glossary#template "Definition of a template")
* [Components](guide/glossary#component "Definition of a component")
* [Angular CLI](guide/glossary#command-line-interface-cli "Definition of CLI") command-line tool for managing the Angular development cycle

{@a setting-up-cli}

## Set up localization

To set up localization, follow these steps:

1. [Add the localize package](#add-localize).
2. [Set your app's source locale](#setting-up-locale).
3. [Import a language-locale combination](#import-locale).

{@a add-localize}

### Add the localize package

To take advantage of Angular's localization features, use the Angular CLI to add the `@angular/localize` package to your project:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
  ng add @angular/localize
</code-example>

{@a setting-up-locale}

{@a setting-up-the-locale-of-your-app}

### Set your app's source locale

Set your app's *source locale*—the locale for the source code of your app—if you don't use English in the United States (which is set by default).
If you use English in the U.S., you don't have to change anything.
You can add more languages as described in the next section.

> Refer to a locale using the Unicode locale identifier (ID).

Author: OK, helpful section now has new title: "Unicode locale identifiers". The section appears just below the sentence: "Refer to a locale using the Unicode locale identifier (ID)."

> Refer to a locale using the Unicode locale identifier (ID).

Author: I moved the helpful section up, and we now have a subheading about referring to the locale by id, near the beginning. See the rewrite. Thanks!

The ID consists of a language identifier, such as `en` for English or `fr` for French, followed by a dash (`-`) and a locale extension, such as `US` for the United States or `CA` for Canada.
For example, `en-US` refers to English in the United States, `fr-CA` refers to French in Canada, and `fr-FR` refers to French in France.
Angular uses this ID to find the correct corresponding locale data.

<div class="callout is-helpful">
<header>Language codes and identifiers</header>

* For a list of language codes, see [ISO 639-2](https://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/ "ISO 639-2 Registration Authority").
* IDs conform to the Unicode Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR).
For more information about Unicode locale identifiers, see the [CLDR core specification](http://cldr.unicode.org/core-spec#Unicode_Language_and_Locale_Identifiers "CLDR - Unicode Common Locale Data Repository").
* CLDR and Angular base identifiers on [BCP47 tags](http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt "BCP47 Tags for Identifying Languages").

</div>

Angular by default uses `en-US` (English in the United States) as your app's source locale.
Angular already contains locale data for `en-US`.

> The Angular CLI automatically includes the locale data and sets the `LOCALE_ID` value when you use the `localize` option with [`ng build`](cli/build "ng build description").

Author: OK done

To set an app's source locale to one other than `en-US`, follow these steps:

1. Look up the ID for the language-locale combination in [the Angular repository](https://github.com/angular/angular/tree/master/packages/common/locales "Common locales in the Angular repository").
2. Set the [LOCALE_ID](https://angular.io/api/core/LOCALE_ID "API reference for LOCALE_ID") token, as shown in the following example, which sets the value of `LOCALE_ID` to `fr`(French):

> <code-example path="i18n/doc-files/app.module.ts" header="src/app/app.module.ts"></code-example>

Reviewer: I don't think this is the best place to show this code here. Although it is accurate, it feels like something that people who are going to be doing serious localization will not do. In general the CLI iswill deal with this for you. Based on the `sourceLocale` field in the `angular.json` file, it will automatically set the `LOCALE_ID` and load up the appropriate locale data without the developer having to do anything more.

The code referenced here would be used if you were not using `--localize` in the CLI or you had a specialized use case that is outside this approach. Moreover if you provide your own value for `LOCALE_ID` then the one specified by the `--localize` option in building the project will not be used.

Unfortunately, at the moment, the CLI does not add the source locale etc if `--localize` is not used with `ng build` or at all during `ng serve`. See https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/issues/16950. I think this is a shame and probably we should add this - at the least we should allow `--localize` as an option on `ng serve`.

So equally I am not sure how best to deal with this section.

Author: I moved this section to the end, with some introductory text.

Author: Thank you for clarifying so many holes in my understanding. The original doc was a problem for me, as I didn't understand why this info was near the top. I think I now have a good handle on it, thanks to your feedback!

{@a import-locale}

### Import a language-locale combination

To add other language-locale combinations to your app, you must first import them.
Also, if you manually set the value of `LOCALE_ID` to another locale as described in the previous section, you must import the locale data for that new locale.

Import [registerLocaleData](api/common/registerLocaleData "API reference for registerLocaleData") and `localeFr`, as shown in the following example, which imports the specific version of French for France (`fr-FR`):

> <code-example path="i18n/doc-files/app.locale_data.ts" region="import-locale" header="src/app/app.module.ts"></code-example>

Reviewer: Again this example is a bit advanced. For most situations one would rely upon the CLI with `--localize` to deal with this for you. I would expect only to do this in more advanced scenarios.

Author: OK, moved this to the end.

Set the first parameter for the [registerLocaleData](api/common/registerLocaleData "API reference for registerLocaleData") function to an object containing the locale data imported from `@angular/common/locales`.
Use the optional second parameter to specify a locale ID to add.
Since Angular's locale data already registers the ID for French as
`fr` (generic French), the second parameter adds and registers the more specific version of French for France (`fr-FR`).

The files in `@angular/common/locales` contain most of the locale data that you
need, but some advanced formatting options require the extra dataset `@angular/common/locales/extra`.
(If use advanced formatting options that require the extra dataset, you may get an error message if you haven't already imported it.)
The following example shows how to import the `localeFrExtra` extra dataset:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/app.locale_data_extra.ts" region="import-locale-extra" header="src/app/app.module.ts"></code-example>

> Angular will automatically include the extra locale data if you configure the locale using the `localize` option with [`ng build`](cli/build "ng build description").

Reviewer: This is the key take away for most developers. They should not normally be trying to load/register their own locale data.

Author: This is now at the very end, AFTER they are exposed to the `localize` option in the build configuration, and the `--localize` option with `ng build`.

{@a i18n-pipes}

## Format data based on locale

Angular provides the following built-in data transformation [pipes](guide/glossary#pipe "Definition of a pipe") that use the injected `LOCALE_ID` token to format data according to the locale's rules:

* [`DatePipe`](api/common/DatePipe): Formats a date value.
* [`CurrencyPipe`](api/common/CurrencyPipe): Transforms a number to a currency string.
* [`DecimalPipe`](/api/common/DecimalPipe): Transforms a number into a decimal number string.
* [`PercentPipe`](api/common/PercentPipe): Transforms a number to a percentage string.

For example, `{{today | date}}` uses `DatePipe` to display the current date in the format for the locale in `LOCALE_ID`.

> You can add the `locale` option to override the value of `LOCALE_ID`. For example, to force the currency to use `en-US` no matter which language-locale you set for `LOCALE_ID`, use this form: `{{today | currency : 'en-US'}}`.

Reviewer: In https://angular.io/guide/pipes it talks about parameters not options for pipes. So I would go with:

```suggestion
You can add the `locale` parameter to override the value of `LOCALE_ID`. For example, to force the currency to use `en-US` no matter which language-locale you set for `LOCALE_ID`, use this form: `{{today | currency : 'en-US'}}`.
```

Author: OK done.

Author: OK, fixed. Thanks!

The build process (described in [Merge translations into the app](#merge) in this guide) uses your app's `angular.json` file to automatically set the [`LOCALE_ID`](api/core/LOCALE_ID "API reference for LOCALE_ID") token and load the locale data.

{@a i18n-pipes}

## Format data based on locale

Angular provides the following built-in data transformation [pipes](guide/glossary#pipe "Definition of a pipe") that use the [`LOCALE_ID`](api/core/LOCALE_ID "API reference for LOCALE_ID") token to format data according to the locale's rules:

* [`DatePipe`](api/common/DatePipe): Formats a date value.
* [`CurrencyPipe`](api/common/CurrencyPipe): Transforms a number to a currency string.
* [`DecimalPipe`](/api/common/DecimalPipe): Transforms a number into a decimal number string.
* [`PercentPipe`](api/common/PercentPipe): Transforms a number to a percentage string.

For example, `{{today | date}}` uses `DatePipe` to display the current date in the format for the locale in `LOCALE_ID`.

To override the value of `LOCALE_ID`, add the `locale` parameter.

> For example, to force the currency to use `en-US` no matter which language-locale you set for `LOCALE_ID`, use this form: `{{today | currency : 'en-US'}}`.

Reviewer: Oops!

```suggestion
For example, to force the currency to use `en-US` no matter which language-locale you set for `LOCALE_ID`, use this form: `{{amount | currency : 'en-US'}}`.
```

* Set `"localize"` to an array of a subset of the previously-defined locale identifiers to build only those locale versions.
* Set `"localize"` to `false` to disable localization and not generate any locale-specific versions.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

Note: [Ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation](guide/glossary#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation) is required to localize component templates.
If you changed this setting, set `"aot"` to `true` in order to use AOT.

</div>

The following example shows the `"localize"` option set to `true` in `angular.json` so that all locales defined in the build configuration are built:

<code-example language="json" header="angular.json">
"build": {
  "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser",
  "options": {
    "localize": true,
    "aot": true,
    ...
</code-example>

<div class="alert is-helpful">

Due to the deployment complexities of i18n and the need to minimize rebuild time, the development server only supports localizing a single locale at a time.
Setting the `"localize"` option to `true` will cause an error when using `ng serve` if more than one locale is defined.

> Setting the option to a specific locale,such as `"localize": ["fr"]`, can work if you want to develop against a specific locale (such as `fr`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting the option to a specific locale, such as `"localize": ["fr"]`, can work if you want to develop against a specific locale (such as `fr`).
```

  ng add @angular/localize
</code-example>

This command updates your project's `package.json` and `polyfills.ts` files to import the `@angular/localize` package.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

For more information about `package.json` and polyfill packages, see [Workspace npm dependencies](https://angular.io/guide/npm-packages).

</div>

> If `@angular/localize` is not installed, building a localized version of your app will cause an error with a message such as:

Reviewer: Hmm, I'm afraid it is a bit more subtle than this.

First this is a runtime error, not a compile time error, so we should be clear about that.

If you use the CLI and build a localized version, I believe that the CLI will remove all `$localize` messages - either translating them or replacing them with the source language strings. So you should not receive this error.

So the only time, I think, you would see this error is if you build a non-localized version (i.e. not adding `--localize` or setting the configuration property) with AOT or build without AOT. In which case the `$localize` tags are left in the code and so you need this import in place to provide code to deal with them at runtime.

I am not 100% sure of this. @clydin is the best to confirm this aspect of the CLI's behaviour.

    </trans-unit>
  ```

Both elements now use the same translation (`Bonjour`) because they were defined with the same custom ID:

  ```html
    <h3>Bonjour</h3>
    <!-- ... -->
    <p>Bonjour</p>
  ```

{@a no-element}

<div class="callout is-helpful">
  <header>Tip: Translate text not for display</header>

  While you can translate non-displayed text using a `<span>` tag, that creates a new DOM element. Instead, wrap the text in an `<ng-container>` element, which is transformed into a non-displayed HTML comment as shown in this example:

 <code-example path="i18n/src/app/app.component.html" region="i18n-ng-container"></code-example>

> </div>

Author: OK, changed it back to a section. Now that the custom IDs section has been moved to the end, the relevancy problem is no longer an issue.

* many
* other

<div class="alert is-helpful">

You can use [interpolations](guide/glossary#interpolation "Definition of interpolation") and HTML markup inside translations.

</div>

{@a select-ICU}
{@a nesting-ICUS}

> ### Mark alternates and nested expressions

Reviewer: ICUs are actually quite a big topic in themselves. It might be worth, in the future, pulling them out into their own guide. For instance when the value of the plural is interpolated into the message:

```
{minutes, plural, =0 {just now} =1 {one minute ago} other {{{minutes}} minutes ago}}
```

The `{{minutes}}` is actually a full Angular interpolation, which can be any arbitrary Angular expression.  This gets extracted as the following message in the translation file:

```
{VAR_PLURAL, plural, =0 {just now} =1 {one minute ago} other {{INTERPOLATION} minutes ago}}
```

(Note the `INTERPOLATION` marker is something that Angular will understand when rendering the message).

Further it is possible to name interpolations so that they are distinguished in the extracted message

```
{
  type,
  select,
    A {A - {{ typeA // i18n(ph="PH_A") }}}
    B {B - {{ typeB // i18n(ph="PH_B") }}}
    other {other - {{ typeC // i18n(ph="PH WITH SPACES") }}}
}
```

will be extracted as

```
{VAR_SELECT, select, A {A - {PH_A}} B {B - {PH_B}} other {other - {PH_WITH_SPACES}}}
```

Author: I'm keeping track of this suggestion in my [Doc Plan for i18n](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aV2TKsIqry7JnNiHEfhmheu5rNAbNl1IRYVhYErc7Ks/edit?usp=sharing) in my "Phase 2" section, in which I break up this guide into 3 task-oriented guides.

After preparing a template for translation, you can use the Angular CLI `xi18n` command to extract the marked text in the template into a _translation source_ file. 
The marked text includes text marked with `i18n` and attributes marked with `i18n-x` as described in the previous section.

To prepare translations, follow these steps:

1. [Create the source file](#create-source) to send to the translator. You can optionally change the location, format, name, or the source locale. 
2. [Copy the source file for each translation file](#localization-folder).
3. [Translate each translation file](#translate-text-nodes).
4. [Translate plurals and alternate expressions](#translate-plural-select).

{@a create-source}

### Create the source file

Open a terminal window, change to the root directory of your app project, and run the following CLI command:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
  ng xi18n
</code-example>

The `xi18n` command creates a source file named `messages.xlf` in your project's root directory using the [XML Localization Interchange File Format (XLIFF, version 1.2)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XLIFF "Wikipedia page about XLIFF").

> You can optionally change the location, format, name, or the source locale of the extracted source file, by adding the following options to the `xi18n` command.

Author: OK, added a bullet list. I don't like mixing punctuation and code format in subheadings, so I didn't do that.

> You can optionally change the location, format, name, or the source locale of the extracted source file, by adding the following options to the `xi18n` command.

Author: Here's the added bullet list:

Use the following `xi18n` command options to change the source language file location, format, file name, or source locale:

> * `--output-path`: Change the location.
> * `--format`: Change the format.
> * `--outFile`: Change the file name.
> * `--i18n-locale`: Change the source locale.
>

> #### Change the source file location

Author: I decided to go with "source language file" throughout the guide, so I'm making that change everywhere. "Translation file" is still the same.

To create a file in the `src/locale` directory, specify the output path as an option, as shown in the following example:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
  ng xi18n --output-path src/locale
</code-example>

{@a other-formats}

#### Change the source file format

> The `xi18n` command can read and write files in three translation formats:

Author: OK fixed, thanks!

* XLIFF 1.2 (default)
* XLIFF 2
* [XML Message Bundle (XMB)](http://cldr.unicode.org/development/development-process/design-proposals/xmb)

Specify the translation format explicitly with the `--format` command option, as shown in the following examples:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
ng xi18n  --format=xlf
ng xi18n  --format=xlf2
ng xi18n  --format=xmb
</code-example>

<div class="alert is-helpful">

  XLIFF files use the extension `.xlf`.
  The XMB format generates `.xmb` source files but uses`.xtb` (XML Translation Bundle: XTB) translation files.

</div>

#### Change the source file name

To change the name of the source file generated by the extraction tool, use
the `--outFile` command option:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
  ng xi18n --out-file source.xlf
</code-example>

#### Specify the source locale

Specify the source locale of your app with the`--i18n-locale` command option:

<code-example language="sh" class="code-shell">
  ng xi18n --i18n-locale fr
</code-example>

> The extraction tool uses the locale to add the app locale information to your source file.

Author: OK, done. Thanks!

This information is not used by Angular, but external translation tools may need it.

{@a localization-folder}

> ### Copy the source file for each translation file

Author: OK, done!

> The `ng xi18n` command generates a source file named `messages.xlf` in the project `src` folder.

Author: OK, changed the sentence to:

> The `ng xi18n` command (with no options) generates a source file named `messages.xlf` in the project `src` folder.

> The `ng xi18n` command generates a source file named `messages.xlf` in the project `src` folder.

Author: This is where I stopped (for now). Picking up again Tuesday. The next push has all changes up to this point.

For example, for French (`fr`), you would create `messages.fr.xlf`.

To avoid confusion with multiple translations, you should organize the language translation files by locale in a dedicated `locale` folder under `src/`. Use a filename extension that matches the associated locale, such as `messages.fr.xlf`.

For example, to create a French translation file, follow these steps:

1. Make a copy of the `messages.xlf` file.
2. Put the copy in the `src/locale` folder.
3. Rename the copy to `messages.fr.xlf` for the French language (`fr`) translation.
Send this translation file to the translator.

Repeat the above steps for each language you want to add to your app.

{@a translate-text-nodes}

### Translate each translation file

Unless you are fluent in the language and have the time to edit translations, you would likely send each translation file to a translator, who would then use an XLIFF file editor to create and edit the translation.

To demonstrate this process, see the `messages.fr.xlf` file in the <live-example></live-example>, which includes a French translation you can edit without a special XLIFF editor or knowledge of French.
Follow these steps:

> 1. Open `messages.fr.xlf` and find the first *translation unit*, which is the first `<trans-unit>` section, also known as a *text node*. This text node is an XML element representing the translation of the `<h1>` greeting tag that was previously marked with the `i18n` attribute:

Author: OK, done.

> 1. Open `messages.fr.xlf` and find the first *translation unit*, which is the first `<trans-unit>` section, also known as a *text node*. This text node is an XML element representing the translation of the `<h1>` greeting tag that was previously marked with the `i18n` attribute:

Author: I also added XML to the Prerequisites section at the top.

> <code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translated-hello-before" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

> > The `id=introductionHeader` is the [custom `id`](#custom-id "Manage marked text with custom IDs") set previously, but without the `@@` prefix required in the source HTML.

Author: OK done.

> 2. Duplicate the `<source/>` tag in the text node, rename it `target`, and then replace its content with the French text:

Author: OK done.

> <code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translated-hello" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;, after translation)"></code-example>

> In a more complex translation, the information and context in the [description and meaning elements](#help-translator "Add helpful descriptions and meanings") described previously would help you choose the right words for translation.

3. Translate the other text nodes the same way as shown in the following example:

> <code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translated-other-nodes" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

<div class="alert is-important">

  Don't change the IDs for translation units.
  Each `id` is generated by Angular and depends on the content of the template text and its assigned meaning.
  If you change either the text or the meaning, then the `id` changes.
  For more about managing text updates and IDs, see the previous section on [custom IDs](#custom-id "Manage marked text with custom IDs").

</div>

{@a translate-plural-select}

### Translate plurals and alternate expressions

> You must translate the [`plural` and `select` ICU expressions](#plurals-alternates "Mark plurals and alternates for translation") separately, because Angular extracts them as separate translation units in the source file.

Reviewer: I liked the original sentence here. Perhaps it could be combined with this?

```suggestion
The [`plural` and `select` ICU expressions](#plurals-alternates "Mark plurals and alternates for translation") are extracted as additional messages, so you must translate them separately.
```

Reviewer: But your call!

Author: OK, done, thanks for the rewording.

{@a translate-plural}

#### Translate plurals

To translate a `plural`, translate its ICU format match values as shown in the following example:

* `just now`
* `one minute ago`
* `<x id="INTERPOLATION" equiv-text="{{minutes}}"/> minutes ago`

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translated-plural" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

> You can add or remove plural cases as need for each language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add or remove plural cases as needed for each language.
```

Author: OK done, thanks for catching this.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

For language plural rules, see
[CLDR plural rules](http://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html "CLDR Charts to view the Common Locale Data Repository data").

</div>

{@a translate-select}

#### Translate alternate expressions

> Angular also extracts alternate `select` ICU expressions as separate translation units.

Reviewer: 👍

The following example shows both translation units after translating:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translated-select" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

{@a translate-nested}

#### Translate nested expressions

Angular treats a nested expression in the same manner as an alternate expression, extracting it into two translation units. The first contains the text outside of the nested expression:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translate-nested-1" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

The second translation unit contains the complete nested expression:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translate-nested-2" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

The following example shows both translation units after translating:

<code-example path="i18n/doc-files/messages.fr.xlf.html" region="translate-nested" header="src/locale/messages.fr.xlf (&lt;trans-unit&gt;)"></code-example>

{@a merge}
{@a merge-aot}

> ## Merge translations with the app

Author: I like that, using it. Thanks!

> ## Merge translations with the app

Author: I worry that this is overload for the localization doc. We haven't explained JIT mode inlining and why it's important in this context. As for an introduction to building and serving, I put in a link to [Building and serving Angular apps](https://angular.io/guide/build) in the helpful box.

> ## Merge translations with the app

Author: Are there major differences in localizing using Ivy vs. the older ViewEngine approach? Should we simply refer them to the [Ivy compatibility guide](https://angular.io/guide/ivy-compatibility)? Thanks.

> To merge the completed translations with the app, build an app package for each locale.

Author: OK. Changing to "a copy of the app's distributable files for each locale" as above. I don't think there is a strict "package" definition, except for an "npm package". Therefore I will use "distributable copy of the app for each locale" from this point on as needed.

> The build process replaces the original text with translated text, and sets the `LOCALE_ID` token for each app package.

Author: OK added, thanks.

Use any of the following methods to merge translations with your app during a build:

* To automatically build a separate package for each locale, [define the locales in the build configuration](#localize-config) in your project's [`angular.json`](guide/workspace-config "Angular workspace configuration").
This method shortens the build process by removing the requirement to perform a full app build for each supported language.

* You can also [build for a locale on the command line](#localize-build-command) using the Angular CLI [`build`](/cli/build "CLI reference for ng build") command with the `--localize` option.

* You can optionally [build for just one locale](#localize-build-one-locale).

The build process uses [ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation](guide/glossary#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation) to produce a small, fast,
ready-to-run app package. With Ivy in Angular version 9, AOT is used by default for both
development and production builds.

<div class="alert is-important">

Ivy does not support merging i18n translations when using JIT mode.

> If you [disable Ivy](guide/ivy#opting-out-of-ivy-in-version-9) and are using JIT mode, see [merging with the JIT compiler](https://v8.angular.io/guide/i18n#merge-with-the-jit-compiler "Merge with the JIT compiler").

Author: I would leave it in (for now) unless there are objections, since it actually points to other documentation. Unless it's not true! Then we should remove.

For example, the following excerpt of an `angular.json` file sets the source locale to `en-US` and provides the path to the `fr` (French) locale translation file: 

<code-example language="json" header="angular.json">
...
"projects": {
  "angular.io-example": {
    ...
    "i18n": {
      "sourceLocale": "en-US",
      "locales": {
        "fr": "src/locale/messages.fr.xlf"
      }
    },
    "architect": {
    ...
    }
}
</code-example>

{@a localize-generate}

### Generate app versions for each locale

To use your locale definition in the build configuration, use the `"localize"` option in `angular.json` to tell the CLI which locales to generate for the build configuration:

* Set `"localize"` to `true` for *all* the locales previously defined in the build configuration.
* Set `"localize"` to an array of a subset of the previously-defined locale identifiers to build only those locale versions.
* Set `"localize"` to `false` to disable localization and not generate any locale-specific versions.

> * Set `"aot"` to `true` in order to use [ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation](guide/glossary#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation).

Reviewer: I think we should check with @clydin what relevance setting `"aot": true` has on localizatin...

}
</code-example>

> To use your locale definition in the build configuration, set the `localize` option in `angular.json` to `true`.

Author: OK, created a new sub-section and reorganized (and rewrote) the entire section on merging. I could use an example, but the `localize` option is not used in the existing example's angular.json file. I'm not sure if it's necessary to insert something that is not in the code. LMK what you think. Thanks.

The CLI places the generated version in a locale-specific directory to keep it separate from other locale versions.
The CLI places the directories within the configured `outputPath` for the project.

> The CLI also adjusts the HTML base HREF for each version of the app by adding the locale to the configured `baseHref`.

Author: OK, edited to be a paragraph, and thanks for the info.

> The CLI also adjusts the HTML base HREF for each version of the app by adding the locale to the configured `baseHref`.

Author: Stopping here for today; more on Wed.

</code-example>

{@a missing-translation}

### Report missing translations

When a translation is missing, the build succeeds but generates a warning such as
`Missing translation for message "foo"`. You can configure the level of warning that is generated by the Angular compiler:

> * Error: Throw an error. If you are using AOT compilation, the build will fail.

Author: OK, done.

}
</code-example>

{@a deploy-locales}

> ## Deploy multiple locales

Reviewer: Perhaps we should have an H2 section here titled something like "advanced topics" or "additional topics" or something. Then put this and the following sections below it as H3s? This would help group them and de-emphasise them as important topics for the average reader.

Author: I left "Deploy multiple locales" as its own section, and added "Optional practices" at the end to include setting the source locale manually, importing a custom locale, and managing marked text with custom IDs.

> For details on how to create scripts to generate an app for multiple locales and set up Apache 2 and NGINX to serve them from different subdirectories, see [Deploying an i18n Angular app](https://dev.to/angular/deploying-an-i18n-angular-app-with-angular-cli-2fb9).

Reviewer: Perhaps we should say that configuring servers for hosting multiple locales is outside the scope of this guide, but that some ideas can be found in this blog.

Generally I feel a bit uncomfortable about relying upon 3rd party blogs to do our documentation...

Author: I included 2 paragraphs of introductory text about how different locales are served, and how the `baseHref` is set for you (and how to use the option to do it yourself). I added the "outside the scope" comment, and then refer the reader to the blog.
